PyPy Sprint before PYCON 2005 in Washington
-------------------------------------------

In the four days from 19th March till 22th March (inclusive)
the PyPy team will host a sprint on their new Python-in-Python
implementation.   The PyPy project was granted funding by the
European Union as part of its Sixth Framework Program,
and is now on track to produce a stackless Python-in-Python
Just-in-Time Compiler by December 2006.  Our Python
implementation, released under the MIT/BSD license, already
provides new levels of flexibility and extensibility at the
core interpreter and object implementation level.

Armin Rigo and Holger Krekel will also give talks about PyPy
and the separate  py.test tool (used to perform various kinds
of testing in PyPy) during the conference. 

Naturally, we are eager to see how the other re-implementation
of Python, namely IronPython, is doing and to explore
collaboration possibilities.  Of course, that will depend on
the degree of openness that Microsoft wants to employ. 

The Pycon2005 sprint is going to focus on reaching
compatibility with CPython (currently we target version 2.3.4)
for our PyPy version running on top of CPython. One goal of
the sprint is to pass 60% or more of the unmodified regression
tests of mainline CPython.  It will thus be a great way to get
to know CPython and PyPy better at the same time!  Other
possible work areas include: 

- translation to C to get a first working lower-level representation 
  of the interpreter "specified in Python" 

- integrating and implementing a full parser/compiler chain
  written in Python maybe already targetting the new
  AST-branch of mainline CPython 

- fixing various remaining issues that will come up while
  trying to reach the compatibility goal 

- integrate or code pure python implementations of some Python modules 
  currently written in C. 

- whatever issues you come up with! (please tell us
  before hand so we can better plan introductions etc.pp.) 

Besides core developers, Bea Düring will be present to help
improving and document our sprint and agile development
process. 

We are going to give tutorials about PyPy's basic concepts and
provide help to newcomers usually by pairing them with
experienced pypythonistas. However, we kindly ask newcomers to 
be present on the first day's morning (19th of March) of the
sprint to be able to get everyone a smooth start into the
sprint. So far most newcomers had few problems in getting a
good start into our codebase.  However, it is good to have the
following preparational points in mind: 

- some experience with programming in the Python language and 
  interest to dive deeper 

- subscription to  pypy-dev and  pypy-sprint at 

    http://codespeak.net/pypy/index.cgi?lists

- have a subversion-client, Pygame and graphviz installed on 
  the machine you bring to the sprint. 

- have a look at our current  documentation, especially the 
  architecture and  getting-started documents under 
    
    http://codespeak.net/pypy/index.cgi?doc

The pypy-dev and pypy-sprint lists are also the contact points
for raising questions and suggesting and discussing sprint
topics beforehand. We are on #pypy on irc.freenode.net most 
of the time. Please don't hesitate to contact us or introduce
yourself and your interests! 


Logistics 
---------

Organizational details will be posted to pypy-sprint and are 
or will be available in the Pycon2005-Sprint wiki here: 

    http://www.python.org/moin/PyConDC2005/Sprints

Registration 
------------

send mail to pypy-sprint@codespeak.net, stating the days
you can be present and any specific interests if applicable. 

Registered Participants
-----------------------

all days: 

     Jacob Hallén 
     Armin Rigo 
     Holger Krekel 
     Samuele Pedroni 
     Anders Chrigström 
     Bea Düring 
     Christian Tismer 
     Richard Emslie 
