Reference/Call For Papers: http://www.ccc.de/congress/2005/cfp.html
DEADLINE: 31st September 2005 (friday)

Title: PyPy - agility through diversity

Subtitle: Sprint driven development in an Open Source Python project - funded 
	  by the European Commission (FP6)  

Section: Hackerethik 

Talkers: Holger Krekel, Beatrice Düring

Abstract (max 250 letters): 

    We´ll present the experiences from managing an agile and distributed OSS 
    development process in the Pypy project, "sprint driven", during the last year 
    and also connect this to the challenges of integrating this process with the requirements
    from the European Commission who is partly funding the project through the 
    6th Research Framework programme. 
    We will also reflect on the aspect of diversity, combining technical 
    and non technical people and skills in the PyPy project and learnings
    from this.

    PyPy is a reimplementation of Python written in Python
    itself, flexible and easy to experiment with.

Description (250-500 words): 

    We are going to briefly describe the organisation of the project, 
    showing how formal stakeholders and OSS Python community interact 
    through agile practices like sprinting.

    We will relate the various agile techniques used in PyPy to the 
    agile practices known from the work in the Agile Alliance (XP, Scrum, 
    Crystal Clear) and show how the PyPy project is developing an ongoing 
    customization of several of the known practices. 

    Lastly we will also share our experience of various challenges and 
    possibilities when integrating the different cultures and skills from 
    the OSS perspective, EU perspective and the Chaos Pilot/process management 
    perspective - managing diversities.   

    PyPy is a reimplementation of Python written in Python
    itself, flexible and easy to experiment with. Our
    long-term goals are to target a large variety of
    platforms, small and large, by providing a compiler
    toolsuite that can produce custom Python versions.
    Platform, Memory and Threading models will become 
    aspects of the translation process - as opposed to
    encoding low level details into a language implementation
    itself. 

    
Statement: We intend to submit a paper (PDF) for the 22C3 proceedings. 
Statement: We intend to submit a slides PDF as well. 

Duration of your talk: 45 minutes + questions 

Language of your talk: english 

Links to background information on the talk: http://codespeak.net/pypy 

Target Group: Advanced Users, Pros 

Resources you need for your talk: digital projector, internet 

Related talks at 22C3 you know of: ... 

A lecture logo, square format, min. 128x128 pixels (optional): 
    http://codespeak.net/pypy/img/py-web1.png 
    (please scale it down a bit :-) 

