Getting to the sprint
=====================

The sprint will be in the home of Laura Creighton and Jacob Hallén on
Götabergsgatan 22.

If you arrive by regular air travel, you will arrive at Landvetter
Airport. Take the airport bus to Park Avenue Hotel. Walk 1 block North
and 3 blocks East.

If you arrive by boat, take a tram to Vasaplatsen, walk 1 block
East, 1 block South or to Valand and walk 3 blocks West, 1 block South.

If you arrive by train, either take a tram to Vasaplatsen or to Valand.
Follow instructions above. It is also possible to walk. The walk takes
15-20 minutes.

If you arrive by airborn cattletransport, take the airport shuttle
to the Central Station. Follow instructions above. 
 
For instructions on how to use the public transit system, and for other
local information, plase see http://www.europython.org.

Events
======

Concert
-------

Our house is 3 blocks away from the Concert House. Both the house and
the symphony orchestra are world class. They will perform Bethovens
violin concerto with Maxim Vengerov on violin and Rachmaninovs
Symphony No. 2.  There is one performance on Wednesday at 19.30, for
which Laura and Jacob already have tickets. Only returns left for that
concert. It plays again Friday at 18.00. If more people want to go,
Laura and Jacob will try to exchange their tickets and go Friday
instead. Normal ticket price is SEK 350. You can take a chance on
getting last minute tickets at SEK 100.

Museum visit
------------

The Art Museum, which is next to the concert house, has a nice special
exhibition of Marie and PS. Krøyer. It also has a lovely regular
collection of mainly Scandinavian art. I suggest a visit on Wednesday
when the museum is open until 21.00.

Eating out
----------

For those who are interested in a gourmet experience, we would like to
suggest a dinner at a restaurant called Popcorn. Despite its name, it
does really good food at prices that are quite reasonable. For
non-vegetarians we recommend their game menu and for vegetarians the
vegetarian menu. The first set menu costs SEK 475. Matching wines with
each dish at SEK 325. The vegetarian menu is SEK 225. Wines at SEK 190.
If there are many people who want to go, doing this mid-week is easier
to arrange than during the weekend.

Food
====

The plan is to do quite a bit of food in the house. However, we expect
all who participate in the eating to also participate in preparations
and clean-up.

If you want to prepare your own stuff, you are welcome to use the
kitchen. Just make sure you leave it in good condition.

There will be lists for food. You have to sign up at the latest the
night before to be sure you get fed on a certain day. Everything will
be approximately at cost and we will ask you for money before you
leave. While it may be a bit more expensive at home, it will be
nowhere near restaurant prices.

Breakfast
---------

Muesli
Yougurt
Milk
Bread
Butter
Cheese
Ham
Cucumber
Tomatoes
Tea
Coffee
Makings for hot chocolate

If there are people craving things like egg&bacon or porridge, that
can be arranged too.

Lunch
-----

Sandwich makings and on some days a soup. If you crave a hot lunch,
there are many lunch places in the vicinity (open Monday-Friday generally).

Dinner
------

We plan to have hot dinners in the house on most nights. Exactly what
food we will serve is not planned yet. Sometimes vegetarian alternatives
will not be a problem, sometimes we will need help in coming up with
a suitable solution. Some ideas for food are:

- Pasta and pasta sauce (vegetarian pasta sauce as alternative)

- Chicken breasts in Parma ham

- Yellow pea soup, arrak punch and waffles (vegetarian soup as alternative)

- Beef curry stew with rice and condiments

- Christmas ham with cream boiled green cabbage and red cabbage

- Beetroot soup (vegetarian)

- Beetroot pie (vegetarian)

- Jansons frestelse (Potato/onion gratin with pickled Baltic herring)

- Lamb burgers with couscous

- Potato and lamb stew with parsley

- Lamb/cabbage stew

- Fishballs

- Cow tounge

- Boeuf Bourgignon

- Coq au vin

- Smoked pork with red cabbage in mustard cream

- Cabbage/mince meat pudding

We will cost food and drink separately for dinner.