Goals and topics of the sprint 
------------------------------

While attendees of the sprint are of course welcome to work on what
they wish, we offer these ideas:

  - Work on an 'rctypes' module aiming at letting us use a ctypes
    implementation of an extension module from the compiled pypy-c.

    MONDAY: (armin, michael t, joshua, gene)
              work on compatibility with various ctypes versions,
              in particular cleaning up the ways of teaching the
              annotator about stuff

    TUESDAY: (armin, michael t, gene)
             More cleanups, and eventually adding a feature:
             beginnings of rtyping arrays.

    TODAY: (armin, gene)
           More of same.

  - Writing ctypes implementations of modules to be used by the above
    tool. 

    PROGRESS: none

  - Implementing Python 2.5 features in PyPy

    MONDAY: (arre, stuart, martin)
            Tour of PyPy, implemented builtins all() and any()
            Then implemented PEP 308, reminding Arre about the
            parser mess, but succeeded.

    TUESDAY: (arre, stuart, anders)
             Some untangling of the stable compiler mess.
             Implemented 'with' from PEP 343, missing some tests
             and the __future__ support.

    TODAY: (arre, sturart, anders)
           Continue, maybe PEP 342.

  - Implementation of constraints solvers and integration of dataflow
    variables to PyPy.
    
    PROGRESS: (anders, george)
              Tour of existing work, work on sudoku solver, but
              kept bumping into bugs.

  - Implement new features and improve the 'py' lib and py.test 
    which are heavily used by PyPy (doctests/test selection/...).

    PROGRESS: (brian, jan)
              Work on making tests pass or skip on win32, packaging
              Unfortunately, Brian is unwell.
             
    TUESDAY: (pat)
             Working on template stuff
    TODAY: (pat)
           More documentation, and checking in.

  - JIT stuff

    PROGRESS: none

  - LLVM backend work

    PROGRESS: (richard, pat)
              Unbroke the backend, some cleaning up, LLVM compatibility
              work, ctypes investigation.

    TUESDAY: (richard, bob)
             Some exploration of LLVM's JIT (but mainly LLVM's build
             system)

    TODAY: (richard)
           ?

  - ootypesystem improvements/smalltalk/lisp backend

    MONDAY: (nik, samuele)
              Keyword arguments for methods, partial __init__ support.

    TUESDAY: (nik, samuele, michael h)
             More PBC, __init__ support.  Fought with class attributes.

    TODAY: (nik, samuele, mwh)
           More fighting.
 
  - Generally experiment with PyPy -- for example, play with
    transparent distribution of objects or coroutines and stackless
    features at application level.

    TUESDAY: (moshez, mwh)
             Played with coroutines a bit.  Wrote a new test.

  - Have fun!

