Chris,
 
Great talking to you -

Grace
415-503-3994
 
Overview of the company - EWT:
 
Profile of the Founders… Top Crude Oil Trader in the world, Wharton MBA, built 
technology teams at Goldman Sachs, AIG.  He partnered with the Strategic Advisor 
to the board of exchange, built largest day trading company (among other things 
on his resume.)  They started EWT, LLC in Nov 01.  They hired their first VB 
programmer to write software for them to conduct more effective trades.  Today, 
they have about 20 people within the technology team; they have 4 traders and 
$60+ million in profit. 

Today, they have a very robust Trading Platform that operates in real time, 
managing a huge number of threads under a single connection with a constant flow 
of data.  It has huge concurrency, maximum uptime, super-low latency, highly 
distributed architecture.  Their systems pipe directly into the stock exchange 
and different electronics market, so you are executing trades at the source, not 
through your e-trade / Charles Schwab broker.  They believe they have applied 
Java and NIO technologies creatively to achieve the most robust, or high 
performance system in the industry.  

They also write their own proprietary Algorithmic Trading Model.  With over 50 
years of trading experience combined, they build these trade strategies to 
analyze and predict market movements based on economic data, news feed, 
historical trends, etc…and as a result, trades are automated.  It’s tightly 
integrated with their platform technologies where they use the news and data in 
a real time bases to do quantitative analysis on viable trade options.

They also have a back office application to do financial settlements, 
reconciliation so they can move the money around (transactional applications, 
etc). 

Essentially, they have the complete trading system.

They are planning to expand into other electronic markets… many opportunities to 
make money, and they don’t have enough highly skilled programmers/coders to do 
this. 

They expect significant impacts on performance and latency as a result.  This 
can be extremely costly because when they are trading at the level and volume 
they do, (a few hundred thousand shares at a time, they make significant amount 
even off small price fluctuations), every millisecond counts.  Bottle necks in 
performance also affects their Algorithmic Trading Model, where they get data 
from New York Stock Exchange, American Stock Exchange, etc. to execute 
automated, quantitative based trading.

This company presents a tremendous opportunity for highly skilled programmers 
and developers to recognize immediate results from applied engineering 
applications.  Huge opportunity to create wealth through applied engineering 
systems.

When we visited their office, it’s like a stock trading floor over there, with 
Plasma TV displaying sticker symbols, charts… and get this, the traders are 
executing their transactions on the click of a button, on the Plasma TV… it’s 
where they display the GUI part of the application. 

 Talk about geeks.  And talk about a recession proof industry.  And talk about 
 using and tweaking the latest technologies to solve big problems.  And talk 
 about seeing your work come to life in real time, immediately, and not having 
 to wait for customers to buy or customer ship, or management’s red tape.  On 
 top of it all, they definitely have some of the sharpest minds we have 
 encountered in our recruiting experience, with low ego too.

Open positions:

In general, they are looking for a select group of people with:
*  3-8 years of software development experience in highly complex and technical environments.
*  Excellent working knowledge of Java and Linux environments.
*  Technical agility and curiosity about the next generation of cutting edge technologies.
*  Flexible personalities, adept in operating with ambiguity and rapid change.
*  Very high work ethics - motivated and passionate about the success of their company, and driven by the contribution that they can make.
*  Strong communication skills and a good sense of humor.
 
Current Opportunities include:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Software Engineer (Platform) - 5-6 positions
As a software engineer, you will work on our core trading
platform, a high-performance geographically distributed system that
executes proprietary trading algorithms.
* Experience with networking, particularly TCP-based.  Java NIO is a plus.
* Advanced skills in core Java technologies, especially with regards to concurrency
and data structures.
* Experience with distributed systems, multi-processing, thread migration, connection pooling or locking
*Experience with Java I/O, JVM, developing Core Java APIs or writing Java class libraries.
* Experience building high-performance, high-transaction volume servers from scratch a plus. 
*Knowledge in areas such as fault tolerance, load balancing, high availability, low-latency and parallel computing is preferred.
* C++, Python, Lisp and Ruby are a plus.
* Knowledge of Java Swing and AWT is a plus.
* Excellent communication skills are required.
---
Software Engineer (Trading) - 5-6 positions
As a software engineer, you will work on proprietary trading
strategies that will run on a high-performance, electronic trading
platform.
You will be involved in improving the scalability, performance, and
efficiency of existing strategies. This position includes strong
collaboration with traders to research and prototype new strategies.
* Candidates should have an interest in trading and financial markets.
* Candidates should enjoy working in a fast-paced, dynamic environment.
* Analytic ability and raw talent are required.
* Excellent programming skills usingJava in a Linux environment
* Background in math, physics, or statistics is a plus.
* Excellent communication skills are required.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Software Engineer (Database) - 3-4 positions
As a software engineer, you will be developing our back-office
financial systems. These systems form the core of our trading operations,
including support for clearing, settlement, reconciliation, and financial
accounting.
* Experience with a variety of database systems, particularly MySQL.
Sybase, Oracle, and/or MS SQL is a plus.
* Candidates should know core Java, especially with regards to concurrency and data structures.
* Experience building web-based database applications. PHP and/or
Java+Struts is a plus.
* Candidates should understand object-oriented design and design patterns, and be comfortable with rapid development.
* Experience generating reports in various formats including CSV.
Microsoft Excel and/or PDF is a plus.
* Excellent communication skills are required.
 
 

 

 
