Summer of PyPy - model (draft) 
-----------------------------------

Motivation 
-----------------------------------------------

As discussed at the PyPy review meeting in January 2006, the
PyPy project has been looking for more easy ways to enable and
foster contributions from the open source community.  The
original model of including individuals as Physical Persons
has proved to be too heavy.  Instead, we want to establish a 
structure reminiscent to Googles "Summer of Code": mentoring 
and funding students contributing to the project.  

The consortium feels very positive about involving more
students.  Experiences from 2005 showed that we got good
contributions from Summer of Code contributors, namely Niklaus
Haldimann and Carl Friedrich Bolz who are still actively
involved in the project and have become valuable members.  

Starting with April 2006 the project has already been participating
in Google's "Summer of Code" campaign and got three participants 
who are working on interesting PyPy aspects: higher level backends 
for the PyPy compiler (.NET and javascript) and writing/porting 
extension modules (related to our new Workpackage 3 approach), thereby
also validating the architecture and implementation of PyPy. 

Additionally we had more good proposals (than the three 
accepted) which make us believe that going for a more pypy-specific 
funding and mentoring model will increase benefits for the
project.  

Model description 
-----------------------------------------------

Accepted students shall be able to attend sprints, the PyPy 
work meetings, in order to contribute and receive mentoring
most effectively.

Here is the proposed work flow for the Summer of PyPy model: 

- Students can send PyPy related proposals to 
  the Technical Board at any time. 
  The proposals must include a technical exposé and
  an anticipated time frame for completion of the work. 

- The TB accepts proposals and assigns mentor(s) to 
  the students, thereby also allowing for reimbursements
  of those students for their sprint/work meeting participance
  during the project's actual time frame. 

- The travel reimbursement will be: 

  - travels: actual costs, proven by bills and tickets. 

  - per diem rates for accomodation: 80 Euro
    accomodation per diem will not be granted for overnight 
    trains, ferries, etc. 
    
  - per diem rates for food: 40 Euro

  sidenote regarding VAT: 
  Any VAT included in the travel receipts is NOT reimbursed to the students 
  by HHU because it cannot account for VAT.  Likely this will not be a 
  huge problem, as only very few travel bills include VAT at all 
  (national train/bus tickets, mostly)

- In case the student does not deliver proper results
  the Mentor informs the Technical Board which can terminate the 
  student's involvement at any time. 

- The Technical Board may also grant prolongations and extensions of one 
  student's work along with further sprint attendance funding
  in case the student's work proves being worthwhile to be 
  continued/extended. 

- Travel reimbursement will be taken from the budget for the use 
  of Individuals contributing to the project (Until now: Physical partners), 
  which is allocated to HHU. 

- HHU will account for the Summer of PyPy funding and 
  report it in their cost statement.  Merlinux is on HHU's behalf
  going to take care for communication with the students, collecting 
  travel bills and calculating per diems for the students and eventually 
  send HHU lists and vouchers usable for their accounting and for 
  reimbursing the students expenses.  merlinux is to take care that 
  the budget is not exceeded overall and will invoice for the overall 
  administrative work to HHU (should be well covered 
  within the 20% flat overheads costs). 


Consortium Decision 
-----------------------------------------------

The consortium agrees on all of the following points: 

* The technical board can accept a PyPy related work proposal 
  from any applying student who will then get an assigned dedicated 
  mentor and reimbursement for sprint attendances under 
  the following terms: 

  - travel, full reimbursement based on provided receipts 
  - accomodation per-diems: 80 Euro per day 
  - food per-diems: 40 Euros per day. 

  Both the technical board and HHU have the 
  right to a-priori reject funding for particular sprint 
  attendances in order to ensure effective spending of 
  the budget for the purposes of the project.  

* allocate 30.000 Euro to HHU for funding the 
  sprint participances of accepted students. This budget
  is taken from the previous allocation for "Physical
  Persons" and should be considered as part of
  the Work Package 14 (Dissemination). 

* HHU can account for travels of accepted students 
  from 1st June 2006 on.  The already accepted proposals from 
  Antonio Cuni, Lawrence Oluyede, Maciek Fijalkowski and Valentino 
  Volonghi can already get reimbursements for their sprint 
  attendances. 
